[END PLAYBACK]
Super nice to see you here at PyCon.
Welcome to the show.
Thank you very much for having us.
It's strange and exciting to do this live and to see you.
Yes, I know.
Normally, it's remote over screen share over half the world
or something like that.
And here we are.
Yeah, and being able to talk with you directly.
Also, with Samuel here, it's super cool, super cool
to be here.
Yeah, thank you very much.
Yes, it's great to be here.
It's really fun being at PyCon.
And then doing this is like, yeah, even more fun.
I've done my talk, so I'm much more relaxed than I would have been if it had been this
time yesterday.
I was just thinking, talking to someone else, one of the best parts about giving a talk
is that when it's over, you can really relax.
You know what I mean?
You're like, "Okay, now I can enjoy the conference."
Absolutely, yeah.
And the parties, because you can't go too big on the parties if you've got to talk.
I feel like all the best ones were last night.
I'm afraid.
We were at a pretty good one last night, weren't we?
That was excellent.
All right.
Well, really good to have you both at the show.
I guess you hardly need introductions.
You both are doing such cool work.
We've had you on the show several times each.
So maybe just, let's start with a catch up.
Like you both have lots of big news.
Don't want to necessarily spoil too much,
but you know, what have you been up to?
- Yeah, so I raised money earlier this year.
Well, it was all sorted last year.
Money came in in January this year.
Started a company around Pydantic.
So I've been busy hiring.
Got a team of seven now.
One more going to join in June.
And yeah, currently we're working full-time
on Pydantic version two, getting that released.
And then after that, we're gonna move on
to the commercial plans,
which I'm not talking about too much,
mostly because they're up in the air a bit.
Also because if you start talking about them,
you have to finish talking about them.
And then that's like,
I'll just like take over the whole podcast.
So I'll say that, yeah,
working on Pydantic v2 for now,
and then moving on soon.
- First from the whole community, congratulations.
You must be really thrilled.
- Yeah, it's amazing.
It's a very surreal, right?
Because I was going to say, I had to see this coming.
No, I didn't.
I had, my plan had been to start a different company once
Pydantic V2 was done.
And then in November, I, Bogumil from Sequoia who Sebastian
knew Sebastian recommended he chatted to me.
We had a call, we had another call two weeks later.
And then he said, let's have the final meeting with like a few more partners
to decide whether to invest in two weeks time.
So I thought, "Oh, I should probably go and speak to some other VCs."
So Sebastian very kindly got me lots of intros.
My girlfriend also got me some intros.
I had like five meetings lined up and then the floodgates opened and I got
another like 20 or so VCs emailing me being like, "Please, can I call?"
Starting to hear about, "Oh, why are we not part of this?"
Right.
Then I got COVID.
So I spent a week locked in the bedroom upstairs doing VC calls.
Most of them with the camera off, feeling absolutely horrific.
And yeah, and then came back full circle back and had the big call with Sequoia and took their money.
So it was Sequoia that invested?
Yeah.
Wow.
Awesome.
That's a big name to have behind you.
So Sequoia and Patek, who are the smaller VC, who are like French American, and then Irregular Expression, which is this really cool CTO network based kind of again, like New York and Paris, and then a bunch of angels.
Yeah, last time we spoke, it was about Pydantic V2 and then all of this broke.
And yeah, I feel like I'm just back up to as in problem was, although I was doing it
to speed up, that was the, within two months of basically doing meetings and
doing legals, so I think I've now got a team sufficiently that I'm like caught
up to where I would have been if I had just sat there and written code all along.
Yeah.
That's how it goes, right?
You gotta, you gotta put a little more sand in the gears to, to, to grow, I guess.
And Sebastian, how about you?
What do you, what have you been up to?
How you been?
Oh,
I think I've been good.
Yeah.
Very excited about like what they are doing at Pydantic is like the team they are assembling is like just amazing.
And like, yeah, just like recently working a bunch in FastAPI and like Dyper and actually like in also some of the low level things of FastAPI and also not just FastAPI, but like the things that go underneath right now, like one of the things that I am pushing for is having documentation of the API reference of the reference of
of the each one of the parameters for what it is for each one of the methods, like all
the stuff.
Yeah.
And I want to do it in a in a better way that is more maintainable and that I can test the
actual documentation for those parameters and consistency between like, there's a bunch
of things that I'm trying to do.
And like, it also goes to the low levels of like, typing and interacting with the people
that is handling typing and like all the stuff that is super cool, super exciting, but like,
I think it can work and it can, it can make these things have like, you know,
like the API reference for the tools is something that a lot of people have been
requesting and like being able to have that in a way that is easy to maintain
that can work well and that I can handle.
Like, I think that's, that's super exciting on that side.
And on the other side, of course, like the integration with Python TV too is super
exciting now that they have like the first alpha available is like,
it is, I mean,
here you are going along working on FastAPI. Everyone I talked to was just universally
impressed with it. You know, honestly, like I've never heard a bad thing about FastAPI.
And people are really enjoying it. And then here comes Samuel, just changing the foundation,
changing up finance. No, no, no, I'm just teasing. So how much work is that actually going to be to
kind of, is it kind of nothing or is it some work? No, like there will be some work in FastAPI. The
The thing is, for final users, it will be almost transparent.
They will probably, if they are doing weird stuff,
complex things that touches the corner cases or things like that,
they will probably have to update some things.
But for most of the use cases, it will be pretty much transparent for people.
And they will just get the 10, 20x performance from Python TV 2.
And also, like the...
I was going to say, just on the performance, I'm sorry to interrupt you.
One of the big things that we will be able to,
you'll be able to drop from FastAPI is the,
I'm gonna call it hack, but it's not your fault,
it's my fault.
(laughing)
Of like, don't ask the type problem of serialization.
So I think that the like speed up on serialization
in FastAPI could exceed, like,
could be even bigger than that.
I don't know that yet, but I'm really hopeful
for some like massive improvements
because of fixes in Pydantic that make FastAPI
simpler and more elegant.
Yeah.
And since they're turning off the lights, we we'll see how long we last year.
We'll, we'll, we'll stay as long as we can.
If you hear any noise in the background, that's because they're trying to tear
down PyCon, but we're going to work around us.
It's easy.
We will not let it be torn out.
It will live on.
It's not because the Pydantic V2.
So yeah, we may have to pause and move, but we'll, we'll find out anyway.
From a user for Pydantic, Samuel,
if you haven't gone and like deeply gone
into like root object validation
and all that kind of stuff,
it's probably you won't even know, right?
- So I think the hardest thing, yeah, you're right.
The vast majority of your code will either continue to work
or we'll have a,
we'll have-- - I'm gonna crash it.
- If you get run over by a forklift,
it's gonna really slow down the development
of Pydantic, by the way.
- We're gonna have a mod tool
to change the name of methods.
So with luck, the vast majority of the changes
should be automated.
I suspect that, and I was saying this earlier
in the open space, the hardest thing
is probably going to be where your API subtly changes
in its restrictions because of effectively edge cases
that Pydantic has fixed.
Like so for example, in Pydantic v1,
we would coerce a int to a string.
If you ever passed a string to a,
an int to a string field, we would coerce it.
I think that that's wrong and we shouldn't have done it,
and so now we don't.
But I was saying in the example,
if for some reason you stored your IDs as strings,
and therefore your API had the ID field as a string,
but your user was just like,
pumping them into your API as integers,
'cause that seemed to make sense to them,
then it's gonna break.
And you probably haven't gotten a unit test that tests that
because you know your ID field is a string.
So I feel sorry for those people,
And my biggest request would be if you're a user,
try Pydantic v2 as soon as possible.
I know if you use it via FastAPI, you can't yet,
but like all the other libraries.
But the sooner you can try it, the sooner you can tell us,
and the more easily we can fix things.
And we are prepared to add compatibility shims.
- Okay, well, I mean, in Python,
we have sort of a from futures import,
well, there'd be from history import
type of like reverse thing, just slow that down?
Or is it going to be a deprecation or is it just
- So we're doing deprecation warnings everywhere we can
or deprecation errors saying this has gone away.
You probably want to replace it with this thing.
We're working really hard on that.
We haven't got a like from future import or a
- Yeah.
- Or a compact layer yet for actual like validation logic.
But if we have to, we will.
- Yeah.
Okay.
You'll see, right?
See how much screaming
What we didn't want to do was try and guess
at what the problems were and build a compatibility layer
that people didn't need.
- Yeah, of course.
- So that's why we're doing it this way.
- Yeah, that makes a lot of sense.
You want to go as minimal, backward,
trying to fill those gaps as possible, right?
- And if I'm brutal about it,
if, in certain name of big bank that use pedantic locks
and never engage with the open source community,
get stung by this, they never paid me a penny,
and they've never engaged, then I'm sorry for them,
But I'm not as sorry as I would be if they had come and reported an issue and tried to
help along the way.
Yeah, yeah.
Can we work with you to smooth this over?
And worst case, pin it.
The Bidanic equal equal 1.10.
I think we'll carry on supporting critical security fixes for a year.
Okay.
So there's something of an LTS type of thing you're thinking?
Yeah.
For a while we have to, right?
For a while.
And yeah, we'll see.
Look at the download numbers and play it by ear.
Yeah.
Cool.
While we're talking about compatibility, if people are doing a lot of the overriding functions
and stuff in their Pydanic models, what should they expect?
Too many changes or pretty similar?
One of the biggest changes is that the init method of a model is now no longer called
unless you literally call init.
So if you call model validate or if your model is nested inside another model, init is no
longer called. The solution for that is to use a wrap validator or a model validator.
But that's going to be one of the like pain points for people. But there's just, it turns
out with the rust API, it's literally impossible without a massive performance hit to do that.
Yeah, sure. Makes sense.
Sebastian, you know, how's do you already have a roadmap? Have you already tried the
alpha on FastAPI? Like what's the story for you guys? So like, yeah, yeah.
John, we have actually been interacting a lot
with what are the changes that are needed,
like what is it going to be?
And like someone was saying, I have a lot of code
that is quite hacky.
I was actually surprised it didn't break much.
It just really worked.
And it's for this particular use case
where you can have like, they are so loud,
they really want to tear us down.
- I know, we might have to be really silent.
But let's finish this up, yeah.
- So--
- It's like concentration challenges.
(laughing)
Validation error, can it concentrate?
So, imagine this use case where you have user model
and then this, you wanna return this user model,
but then you have an authenticated user model
as you were showing in the talk, in the PyCon talk.
And then this authenticated user model
has a field that is a password.
If you return that use, the authenticated user directly,
FastAPI does a lot of tricks to make sure
that what you receive in the client side
is the actual user without the password.
That is the thing that you declared
that we were going to return.
But by default, if you don't do it through FastAPI,
but you do it with just plain Pydantic,
it will just check like,
hey, is this an instance of the other?
And then it will include the field.
Because, you know, because in thinking about types,
it makes sense.
Like, oh, this is a subclass of that,
so it makes sense that it's valid.
But when you think about data in an API,
it doesn't make sense that it will include more data
than what it should.
- Right, right, right.
'Cause you don't wanna either have a mass injection attack
on the inbound data or an over exposure on the way out.
- You know, give away the password from users.
- Is that bad?
- I think it's pretty bad.
- Okay, yeah, all right.
- You know, for example, some months ago or years
or something, I remember that the Kaggle API
was returning some of the hashes of the experiments.
So like, you know, it's a mistake,
but it's sad that it could end up just filtering more data
than what it should be returning.
And it's something that can happen very easily.
It can happen very easily to FastAPI applications
if people don't specify what is the response model,
the thing that they want to return,
and they just return a bunch of data directly.
So FastAPI does a lot of things to make sure
that when you declare a response model
that should filter this data, the data is filtered.
But that's a lot of code in FastAPI to make it compatible.
With the new Pydantic V2, that's gonna be
pretty much transparent, so that's amazing.
- That is amazing, yeah.
- There's gonna be a bunch of things
that require some refactoring and also making sure
that the Pydantic V1 and V2 are compatible
at the same time in some way
so that people can have a migration path.
But yeah, we have been making sure that all the things
that need to be changed or that need to be updated,
or all the things that need to be exposed
from the Pydantic side are actually available.
- Yeah, it's awesome that you guys are working
so closely together on this.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- I mean, it's gonna make it.
- Yeah, absolutely.
- In my mind, these two projects are pretty closely tied.
I know that they're not, but that's a big use case.
- Yeah, I think that's true, and we know that FastAPI
is by far our biggest dependent, but also Django Ninja,
which is, I think, now second or third,
maybe third after SQL model by stars.
Is like Vitaly who maintains that has been engaging a lot
with us on V2.
So yeah, lots of other projects are interested in it.
And I think, yeah, lots of people will be able
to remove messy code because of that problem.
But yeah, like the invariance
of the response interface problem.
- That's fantastic.
- Coming back to your previous question about.
- Before you go to that,
I think we should probably find out what do you think?
- Yeah, I think you might be right.
- Yeah, not even necessarily, I think the audio may be okay,
but just for a concentration,
It's very loud with the trucks around us.
- I feel like I'm on the deck of that aircraft carrier
as they throw things off the side.
- Yeah, okay, let's pause this for a moment.
We'll be back, hold on.
So we have survived the disassembly.
We have returned to continue.
And I think we were talking about the integration
of FastAPI and Pydantic, and that was really cool.
I think something I'd like to kind of move to real quick
is this big announcement, alpha of version two.
Samuel, last time you were on the show,
we spoke about the plan for version two,
and now you're at least in an alpha stage.
Tell people where we are with this.
- Yeah, so we're, yeah, we've had two alphas,
maybe three alphas now out.
We're basically pretty close to a feature freeze,
and the plan is to release the package,
release the beta, and effectively,
we hope that we can then release the full release,
say two weeks after that, but there'll be bugs
and we'll fix them and we'll have more betas,
but effectively once we get to beta,
the plan is that active development
is stopping bar fixing bugs.
- Now it's performance and bugs, right?
- Yeah, and obviously one of the big things will be
once that's out, there'll be a lot more work on say,
FastAPI, Django Ninja, et cetera, et cetera,
and that might come back with we really need this thing.
Either this is broken or we really need that
to reduce the overhead of upgrading.
One of the things I did for Pydantic 1.10,
which was super valuable in beta,
was to go through packages that use Pydantic,
initially sorting by star,
but then looking at what they actually do
and trying to upgrade them.
And that found me a bunch of bugs
in either libraries or in Pydantic.
So we're not promising we're gonna go
and upgrade the whole of GitHub to Pydantic 3.2,
but we'll do a bit of that mostly to try and find bugs.
One of the things that would be really useful
is if anyone has an application that uses Pydantic,
preferably without FastAPI or another library,
that they would like help upgrading,
we would love to come and help.
And it might be a really powerful way of us, again,
seeing the real pain points and identifying bugs
before we get to v2.
- Yeah, and I guess another thing to mention
that is a real headline,
and I also wanna get your thoughts on this, Sebastian,
is the performance numbers, right?
I mean, you put out some pretty impressive performance numbers,
and Sebastian gets to piggyback on that, right?
Yeah, I mean, yeah, I'm really proud of it, right?
- Yeah, you should be. - I think to go in a change of release,
in a bump of release, to be in the ballpark of 22 times faster,
not 22%, but 22 times faster,
I don't know of another package that's made an upgrade
of that kind of order of magnitude.
What's crazy is it's not numerical computing, right?
It's general purpose.
If you look at the example I gave in my talk earlier,
it's a completely standard Pydantic model with four fields.
And that's where we're seeing that kind of like
22 times speed up.
So I think it's gonna be massive.
I have my own cynicism about people who hype
about performance as being the most important thing.
I don't think most applications,
it's actually the thing that matters most.
But I think it matters, A, it matters to everyone,
and everyone wants it to go in the same direction.
And two, it matters to the whole world
and to the whole community that we effectively reduce the energy that we,
that we consume like doing compute basically.
Right.
That's absolutely true.
And also, even if people don't actually need it, there's a group of people
who are like, well, I'm going to leave for go because it's not fast enough,
or I can't do enough concurrency or whatever.
And if they don't have that feeling, even if they didn't actually need
that percentage increase, that's still really good for the Python community.
Even me, I was saying I had a gigabyte of data from web analytics
that I needed to load into a Polar's data frame.
And for that, I needed to A, extract some attributes from nested fields
and B, parse dates and things like that.
And I used Pylantic V2 and it was vastly faster with V2.
It went from like twiddling your thumbs to it happens virtually instantly.
- That's fantastic. - And that'll be even more true
when you have an order of magnitude or two orders of magnitude more data.
Yeah, for sure. Sebastian, how about you?
What's the knock-on effect for FastAPI?
So, I think one of the coolest things is that
people won't have to change the code to get that performance benefit.
It's just going to be like a bump, suddenly.
And because of the new ways that Pydantic can handle the data,
we're going to be able to-- there's something that needs to be done in FastAPI,
FastAPI, but we're going to be able to let the parsing of the data, let it, let
that Pydantic handle that in the Rust side. So Pydantic will be able to just
read the JSON bytes instead of reading them in the Python side and let Pydantic
do that and then Pydantic give the models back to the rest of the code of
FastAPI. That alone will boost performance a lot, but the fact that it's
being done in Rust, in the Rust side, it's just gonna be amazing. Yeah. Like one of
there are things that I want to do that is on the plans is to let users define
how they want to serialize data and not have like, this is just like by default
is just like, I don't think models and like it converts automatically to Jason,
but I want to allow users to decide how to serialize the objects and the data so
that they can this quite like data classes or something like that.
Or yeah, for example, they can say like, Oh, I don't want to serialize with the
standard Jason serializer.
I want to serialize with our Jason, which is like the I see rust based.
- Ah, got it. - ...to serialization.
Or they can say, like, "I want Pydantic to be the one that serializes this
because I know that this is just a model that can handle that."
They can also, like, and this is one of the things that I think is super cool,
they can also create, they will be able to create a way to say,
"I want to serialize this response to XML,"
or something like that, or to YAML,
and to let Pydantic handle the validation,
but then, like, do the serialization in a way that they can customize the whole thing
without having to do it directly in the code.
Maybe even some of these crazy stream buffer
- Yeah, yeah, yeah. - type of protocols.
- Protocol buffers with gRPC, - Protocol, that's it.
or even message pack, or a bunch of these things that
there's no obvious way and there's no native way
to have support for that, for reading the data
and for exporting the data, and that's one of the things that I have in plans.
I'm probably saying too much and then I'm going to account all of this.
And now they're like, "You know what? You promised this.
You did promise it."
Well...
Can I just come back on serialization for a minute?
Yeah, please.
Yeah, so what we've...
I've worked from October,
putting to one side the whole funding round in the middle of it,
was working solidly on serialization.
So we have...
There's almost as much code in Pydantic Core now
for serialization as there is for validation.
Yeah, wow.
We can serialize directly to JSON
using the same underlying library that...
or JSON uses, using Serdy.
But one of...
And also we can, you can customize how your serialization goes on a per field
basis rather than on a per type basis, which is like incredibly powerful.
But we also allow you to effectively serialize to Python.
So not just what used to be the dict method, but basically do JSONable Python.
So you effectively set the mode when serializing to Python to JSON, and you
will only get the like, whatever it is, seven primitive JSON types in Python,
which is super valuable if you want your output to be XML, because then you know
your XML encoder only needs to take in dictionaries, lists, ints, floats, none, bool.
Yeah.
Rather than whatever complex data you have.
So there's an, yeah, I'm like super proud of lots of the advantages of serialization.
My 45 minute talk earlier, I was able to touch about half of the big new features, which
kind of talks about quite how much has changed.
Yeah, that's really exciting.
I think we definitely, I was saying earlier,
if I had known how long it was gonna take,
I would never have set out on this journey.
So the best thing about it is I didn't think
about how long it was gonna take
because we didn't try and do a bit more.
We tried to do everything, or I tried to do everything.
And that's how it's disadvantaged.
It's taken longer than we had hoped, but here we are.
- But here you are, you're pretty much here.
That's really good, that's really good.
And so when you think about performance,
obviously the 22 times faster is awesome.
The FastAPI speedup is awesome.
But if you do something like SQL model and FastAPI or beanie and FastAPI,
you're getting on both ends, you're getting that beanie or the
identic than if it's with the beanie integration and the fast.
So you, you kind of putting.
Hydanek in both those layers.
And so those speedups are like twice as good or something like that.
Yeah.
Right.
I think you, well, they're probably yeah.
They're the same relatively, but more in absolute terms.
- Yeah. - Yeah, absolutely.
- So yeah, I think it's,
the fact that so many things have been built upon Pydanic
means you've just sped up a bunch of projects
without them doing too much.
- Yeah, we get the win.
It's like CPython itself getting faster helps everyone.
This is like the next layer down,
but as a dependency of lots of packages,
we get to speed up lots of the community
with one package, like one person devoting a year to it.
Does this surprise you to see all these projects coming out?
Here's another project based on Pydantic plus,
you know, name your other thing that it's integrated with.
- It's been crazy, particularly in the machine learning space
where, you know, LangChain, who are one of the big names
right now in these big language models,
large language models, all based on Pydantic, right?
- Yeah.
- You were saying, I think on Twitter,
that OpenAPI use a bunch of FastAPI, right?
- OpenAI?
- Sorry, yeah, OpenAI, not OpenAPI.
(laughing)
Marvin from, I think, from Prefect is built on Pydantic again.
So like the wave of machine learning stuff seems to have leveraged Pydantic a
whole lot, DockerA being another big example.
Yeah.
It's amazing.
Some for Elastic and some other things as well.
So coming back to you, Sebastian, you know, I'm sure one of the big things
you're thinking going forward with FastAPI is like, how do you guys work
together and make this a seamless change?
What else you got?
What else are you working on?
What else do you see in the future?
- I have a bunch of things.
- Are they secret or can you tell us?
- No, no, I can tell.
Most of it I can tell.
I just feel the accountability.
But I can tell.
So I have a bunch of projects.
The funny thing is that in some way
it's kind of a dependency graph
of things that I should work on.
So for example, I have this project generator
for FastAPI to generate a project with a SQL database.
I haven't updated it in a long time,
and it uses SQLAlchemy.
I built SQL model for that project, to use it there.
But I haven't updated it there,
because first I want to upgrade more things in SQL model,
I want to finish the documentation,
finish the story about migration.
But then for the story about migration,
I need Typer for SQL model.
So I need to update things in Typer.
And then for Typer, I want to add support for annotated,
which is actually one of the big things,
one of the recent big things in FastAPI,
is that now there's support for annotated.
So, annotated is this feature from Python,
it's like standard Python typings.
You import from typings, import annotated,
and then you can use that to emit information
to the types that you define for parameters.
- Like what, I haven't used this.
I love typing, I use it all the time,
and here I'm learning more about typing.
- The thing is, it exists there in the standard library,
but it doesn't have like a canonical use in Python itself.
it's there mainly for FastAPI and Pydantic to use it.
You know, like, it's just that, like,
I hadn't pushed for that before.
But the thing is, you import from typings,
import annotated, and then you create a function
that takes like a username,
and then this function will normally be of type string.
So it will be, the parameter of the function
will be username colon str.
Now you can say username colon annotated,
and then open square brackets as if it was like a list
or like a dict or something.
Open square brackets and then the first thing
that you put there, that's the actual type.
So you will say annotated string.
- Ah, okay.
- And then you can pass additional metadata afterwards.
And the additional metadata is the thing
that you will use to tell FastAPI
this should be extracted from the query parameters
or from the cookies or from headers.
Before, and like up to recently in FastAPI,
the only way to do that was using
the default value of the parameter.
- Right, you would set the default to like a depends
- Yeah, it depends, or equals a cookie,
or equals header, or something like that.
And then FastAPI can take the information from that
to give you the data in your function.
But the thing is, if you call that function manually
somewhere else, the editor and Python won't complain
that you are not passing some parameter that is required.
And then you're gonna end up with some strange value
internally that is just for FastAPI.
- Right, or the type checker complains,
you're not passing a depends, like,
no, I'm passing a string, that's what it's supposed to be.
But that's some weird thing. - Yeah, exactly.
- Exactly. - Yeah, okay.
- So for those cases, having annotated,
like all the type is exactly what it is,
and if it has a default value,
is the actual default value,
instead of like some strange internal concept in FastAPI.
And having support for that allows having like
much better support for typings, for editors,
auto-completion, inline errors, all these things,
reusing the same functions in other places.
And it will also, having support for that in Typer
will allow users to have the same function
being used for FastAPI and Typer,
having the custom metadata necessary
for each one of the parameters for FastAPI and for Typer,
and things like that.
So it's something that is super powerful
and super interesting.
- I'm gonna come in on annotated
'cause I'm excited about it too.
So, Pydantic v2, we use annotated
for all of our custom types.
So for example, positive int type is just annotated of int,
and then we use the annotated types package,
which is some reusable metadata for annotated.
So we would use, like, positive int is annotated of int,
and then greater than zero.
And what's even cooler is that will be used
by Pydantic, of course.
Hypothesis is gonna get support for that pretty soon,
so it will only pass a positive value in
if it sees greater than zero there.
And then Typer, I guess, could,
even if it's still based on click,
it can go and take that greater than
and infer it as, you know, must be greater than zero.
So I think it was one of the things that
typing guys when they first created Annotated
hoped was gonna build a rich network of
of libraries that interchanged metadata.
It's taken a bit longer than they expected,
but we're getting there.
- I hear the two of you are kind of doing that a little bit,
right, that's cool.
That's really cool.
One of the areas where I feel like typing
is a little janky is on ORMs and ODMs,
when you define a class, you say, for example,
It's like a SQL alchemy column, or it's a beanie column, or something like that.
And the type is it's a string column, but really it's a string, it's not a string column.
And so there's this weirdness of using types to kind of drive behavior.
That's a perfect case for using annotated.
That's what I was thinking, yeah.
What it doesn't do is the other case where there is a context where you'd want to get
the column object of some sort rather than the integer in a row.
So it does mean two different things, the kind of dot objects in the Django context,
but yeah, absolutely.
It's there precisely to solve this kind of problem.
And it's also because, like, currently, as far as I remember, there's no way--
so the thing is that this is all based on something called descriptors,
and is that when you call, like, I don't know, classUser.name,
it's actually the attribute in the class,
But when you create an instance of that user, and then say user.name,
that is the attribute on the actual instance.
And the way that these ODMs or ORMs or these things work
is that they have a special way to say, like,
when someone calls the actual class, this is a different thing
than when someone calls an instance attribute.
- Right. It's sort of two behaviors. - Yeah, yeah.
And it's super powerful. That's how SQLAlchemy works.
And it's super powerful because then, like, all the queries and all the stuff
is actually consistent with how Python works.
And you can say, "greater than or equals to,"
using Python syntax, which is great.
But then, currently, as far as I know,
there's no way to define that
with type annotations in a standard way.
I think it's something that will probably be improvable,
but I think there's currently no way.
There will probably be a way at some point,
but to be able to say, "Hey, this equalAlchemy column
is a column when it's accessed at the class level,
but this is going to be a string when it's accessed at the date."
I like that.
Instance level.
A scope level in the annotated, you know.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
The class that's this and this and this.
Yeah.
And the instance is that and that.
Yeah, that's really interesting.
While we're talking types, and I know you both are really big fans because it's such
a central part of both your libraries, what do you want to see coming?
It feels like this is an area of Python changing fast, but is there something like, if they
could just...
And I have another question on types, by the way, after that.
Fire me.
So I gave a talk at the typing summit,
asking for certain things.
So now we're gonna test my
can I remember PEP numbers challenge,
which I'm gonna fail in, but PEP 472,
is that keyword args to,
so one option would be to allow keyword arguments
to get item, which would make annotated even more powerful
because then you could use keyword arguments
to describe the meaning of your metadata,
rather than having to have these kind of identifier types
like greater than.
One of the big things that I hope we're gonna persuade,
so I think one of the things that's happened recently
is that everyone gets that runtime use of type hints
is a legitimate thing.
They might not wanna do it themselves,
but they get that it's a legitimate thing to do.
- How much pushback was there
when you first came out with PyTandric there?
- I think we were like the black sheep of Python.
I was a black sheep of Python.
- This is supposed to have no meaning.
What are you doing?
You're doing it wrong.
- And I think nowadays that's changed
and everyone gets it's a real thing.
So for example, the hash of a union is independent
of the order of the members of the union.
That makes sense in the context of static typing
where the union of int float is exactly the same
as the union of float int.
It turns out in static typing,
particularly when you're doing coercion,
there are some cases where that is not the case.
And so it's really difficult right now
that effectively when you, unions are fine on their own,
but if you have a union say within a string,
the capital string square brackets,
it will, the order will be,
match the order that the first time you called that,
not what you actually called,
unless you use lowercase string when it is the right order,
except there's a PR open right now
to break it on string too.
So, string as well.
So anyway, we are on lowercase list as well.
Anyway, so things like that,
where I do think that like,
we'll see what happens on that particular case,
but I feel like the voice of people doing runtime
use of types, we're not the only people,
are being heard better, and like, yeah,
I think things are gonna continue to improve.
- Yeah, there was a PEP that proposed an optimization
for typing that kind of broke the runtime behaviors
of it a little bit for both of y'all.
- Yeah, it did in some edge cases,
and that's gonna be fixed soon by the successor pep.
Absolutely, so that's really good.
Generic alias is another thing that like kills us internally in Pydantic.
I won't go into all of the details of it, but yeah, we would, it seemed what the
high level takeaway is that the typing community seemed happy with the idea that
they might make a change to typing to make it easier for us.
And I think that's also for, for the Pydantic team to engage better.
And instead of spending ages, problem is right.
Like you have a problem, you see a solution in typing, you submit the PR,
even if it gets accepted in a week, which it won't,
you wait five years before we can remove the code
that deals with the other case.
So it's very tempting not to engage with typing,
but just go and write the work around
where we should be better Python citizens
and go and submit the PR to CPython
to try and fix it properly.
- Yeah, what's your wishlist for typing?
- So, well, the first thing is like this thing
that I have been trying to work on
and like trying to do to have like better ways
to do documentation of the APIs
that's also related to typing and to the annotations.
Like, let's see if I can pull it off.
The other thing is like, it's actually not that necessarily
that related to the things that we have been talking about,
but it's quite relevant for the data science
and machine learning community.
That is that there are many, many APIs for many libraries
that decorate in some way, some function,
and then the function is expected to give some types
of values to the body of the function internally,
but to be able to receive different types of values.
That sounds a bit abstract, but that's the core idea
that is replicated across several libraries.
And this will apply, for example,
to Ray, the distributed machine learning
or computing system, to Dask, to, I think,
Dagster also uses something like that,
Monad, this system for deploying workloads
and machine learning, and a thing like that
also uses these types of ideas.
So there are many of these libraries
that the way that they are designed is that you create some function,
and then you're going to tell something to call this function,
and then in the function you say, "I want to expect this value,"
and instead of you calling all the functions that will generate that value,
you tell it, "Hey, distributed system blah blah blah,
give me this value, execute this for me."
But that means that you will have or no type annotations,
or invalid type annotations, or red squiggly lines in some places,
or no autocompletion or autocompletion for the wrong things,
just because there's currently no way to define this specific thing of saying,
"Hey, this function, after being decorated,
is going to be able to receive a different type
than what it's going to give to internal."
So I think that's something that,
and it's probably quite challenging and a big thing to tackle,
but it's something that is replicated across several libraries,
in particular for these things that do distributed processing of data.
I think that's something that will be great to improve.
Does paramspec fix some of that?
It's very close, but the paramspec only does it for being able to sort of copy
the params that come from one function to another.
And actually, I use all that, for example, for asynchro and for other things
to be able to get auto-completion for the decorated function
or for the generated function or things like that.
And the change will probably be somewhere around paramSpec
to be able to say, not just the paramSpec,
but this function will not only have the paramSpec,
but will receive a modification like this of the parameters.
Almost making paramSpec generic.
All right.
One more typing question.
Do you all think typing is going too far with the generic stuff?
and is it going too much like C++ and C# and Java,
or is it still good?
I think the way Python is growing is super interesting
because we all have to agree that Python 3.12
is not the same Python 2.7.
- Yeah. - It's quite different.
And I think it's different in a good way.
The users are different and the focus of the runtime is different.
And the things that we can do with types now,
and the fact that in Python, we can access these types at runtime,
which means, I don't know, I was always confused with the term "runtime."
It's like, "What does that mean?"
I think when you execute Python,
the same Python code can inspect and see what are those types.
That's what FastAPI and Python do.
It's just seeing what are those types.
We can do that in Python.
You cannot do that in things like TypeScript,
or you cannot do it in Java.
You cannot do it in many other languages,
get access to this typing information
to be able to do additional things with that, like validation,
data serialization, documentation, all that stuff.
So I think that's, to start, that's super powerful in Python.
The language in Python for typings is not as powerful as, for example, TypeScript.
There is just like so much stuff that you can do with that.
Nevertheless, I feel that in Python, it's just like,
it's growing and it's growing organically.
And like, we have growing pains, you know?
Like, there are some things that are like,
"Oh, this little thing here is slightly incorrectly named."
But like, now there's a better way to do that in Python 3.10,
so we don't care much about that slightly incorrect name,
things like that.
- Yeah, I feel like there's some tensions of people
who are on the mypy side,
and they want perfect validation of,
"I want to prove my code hangs together
"like a static compiler."
And folks like you all, who are like,
"We want to leverage typing to make it behave
in interesting ways. And maybe that behavior expression doesn't exactly match what it looks
statically like, but it is, everybody wants it, but it's, it's might trip up my pie. And I feel
like there's this tension between those two things. That's kind of what I was thinking.
I think there's a little bit of that, but at the same time, there's, is much less than you could
imagine. There are so many people that are so close to, you know, core my pie and these things
that are actually very excited about the things that we are doing.
So, you know, it's actually quite friendly, all the communication.
It's just that there are some people that just don't really care about runtime types,
and that's fine.
But I feel like it's much more closer together and much more stronger, the relationship, I think.
Yeah, yeah, it's great.
Yeah, I think actually we've gone in the...
Typing's got better for someone who's not...
Like, it's actually got less verbose, cleaner, easier to understand.
and you don't have to import union,
you can do pipe operator.
You don't have to import list from typing,
you can use list, which makes complete sense.
Any is an unfortunate one,
but I also understand why the any function,
it would not make sense for the any function to be--
- 'Cause I give up, I can't deal with this part, so yeah.
- No, in general, I think it's got much better.
I do think that the interchange between runtime,
so there's a PEP open now to add to data class transforms,
a converter function.
I forget exactly how it works, but I think that is awareness in the static typing space
that data gets converted when you construct something that looks like a data class.
So no, I think it's really positive.
I think we're incredibly lucky that we're, like I say, TypeScript is the other, in some
ways the best untyped language typing system.
But the fact that they're not available at runtime means we're killing it, I think.
I spoke to someone who maintains a library
that does type analysis at runtime in TypeScript,
and all his types are strings.
And they're valid TypeScript, but they're strings.
And that's, you know,
he was saying that doesn't matter and it's all fine.
I tend to feel like it probably does a bit.
We're really lucky to have them at runtime.
Then you go to the other end
where I've been writing a lot of Rust.
I am like, Rust's great, it has many advances,
but if you want to just get something done
and not have to think too hard about what the types are,
It's really nice.
I write a lot of Python is untyped when I'm just trying to get something to, something to work.
I'm not a, like everything must have a type on it kind of person.
So no, I think we're in a really great place and I think most of the
advantages are actually cleaning it up.
So the new six something, six 49, the new generics syntax to me, 695.
- There are two types of people in the world.
There are people who know the names of their,
numbers of their peps, and there's everyone saying.
That for me cleans up generics, right?
Yes, it's a fundamental change to the language.
Yes, it makes the syntax of a function
look a bit more like Rust or something,
but if you look at it independently of our experience,
it's a heck of a lot more elegant than importing Typefra.
- All right, yeah, yeah.
Let me ask you one that's purely theoretical,
I don't think it'll get adopted, but we have int pipe none, we have optional of int.
A lot of languages have question mark for nullable types. Like it could be int. You
can even say like int. I'm not sure. Is it an int? It could be an int. It might be nullable.
I don't know. Right? Or use int. It's an int. You just know. There's no question mark.
And those types, what are your thoughts about like null collissing, you don't care?
- I'm really happy with the new situation and not having the optional that isn't optional.
That's been a problem for a long time, so not needing to use optional
is being able to use pipe none is great.
I actually think one of the things that's going to happen,
particularly with the advent of the match syntax
and with increased use of type dict,
we're going to need a new union type
that operates much more like an enum in Rust.
So basically a union that keeps track of which member of the enum
you have an instance of.
I keep meaning to build a like package to demonstrate what I mean and I haven't got around to it
But like if you have a union of type dicts, which is a legitimate thing to do
It's effectively impossible without starting to do effectively validation to work out which member you're on
So I think we need and it would be really neat if you could use a match expression to process each
Branch of your union Sebastian
You already say there
No, but like, you know, like I feel that way.
I was saying that like, I feel Python is just like growing
and like the typing system is growing.
I feel it's growing in a very healthy way
because it's not, you know, it's not like just some academics
hidden in some corner somewhere saying like,
this is how it should be done.
- I did my thesis on this type system and here we are.
- And then like everyone should just use it.
It's just like a lot of hearing everyone
and just receiving the feedback from everyone
and just like growing in the ways that it should grow.
I think that's amazing. I think like we are, you know, it's like a kind of Renaissance,
the health of like typing in Python and like how we can build all these things. I think that's
amazing. I think it absolutely is. I think we're pretty much out of time. We've used up all the
various places we've escaped to at a shutting down conference here. Final question for you both,
just, you know, what's your big takeaway? What's the experience like here at PyCon? Like, how's it
been 2023? For me, it's been amazing. It's my first PyCon in the US. Oh, it is? Yeah. Like I
I have never been in a PyCon in the US.
I have been in PyCons in many other places, but not in the US.
And I got to put faces to so many handles in Twitter and GitHub.
I got to meet you in person.
That's amazing.
- Wow, that's great.
- And a bunch of other people that I only knew,
just on the internet, a bunch of core developers.
And that's so cool.
They are so cool.
I knew they were super cool, but just talking on Twitter
and then seeing them in person, that's amazing.
- It's my favorite part of the whole conference,
It's just the people and getting together.
- Definitely.
I think I attended like two talks.
- Yeah, yeah.
- I was just on the hallways talking to everyone.
- You feel the hallway traffic.
- Yeah, yeah, I was all the way on the hallway traffic.
- Awesome, well that's great.
- Yeah, I absolutely love it.
I remember Sebastian and I joined the Language Summit
remotely two years ago, the year when there was no PyCon.
And the most interesting bit of the like four hour Zoom call
was the five minutes between talks when people just chatted.
And I remember then thinking how cool PyCon must be
to have that same group of people in a room rather than on a Zoom call.
So, no, I love it. I think it's... I've really enjoyed it.
Last year was my first year. This year is even more fun.
Yeah, I really enjoy it.
Awesome. Yeah, it's been great to meet you both in person.
Of course, meeting you has been the best bit of all of it.
Oh, thank you very much. No, no.
It's been really great to spend some time with you all here.
Thanks for coming on the podcast, part two now here to wrap things up.
So, thanks for taking the time.
And congrats both on the success of your projects.
They're amazing.
Thanks so much.
Thank you very much. Thanks for having us.
Thanks for seeing us.
Yeah, bye guys.